---
guid: "urn:UUID:67d72442-2420-49b6-8e46-bc7bde922181"
itemtype: Item/Page/Article
Published: 2010-01-15
Category:
    name: Media
    label: media
Title: "The Three C's of New Media: Creation, Curation, and Compilation"
---

The Three C's of New Media: Creation, Curation, and Compilation
===============================================================

Every media business is built around at least one of three key content
activities: creation of content, curation of content, and compilation of
data into content. Many media businesses, especially the large ones,
make all three of these activities core competencies. Which sounds most
like your business?

Creation of Content
-------------------

This is what most people think of when they think about media: writing
articles or features, shooting video, recording audio. In the Internet
world it also includes blogging, micro-blogging, and podcasting. The
creation (and publication) of original content is often a major focus
(and a major expense) for media businesses, both traditional and
digital, but it’s only one piece of a larger value proposition.

Curation of Content
-------------------

A curator’s job is to select, organize, and care for the items in a
collection. The title has usually been applied to museum conservators
and librarians. In the Information Age, we can all become librarians. In
fact, in this age of information overload, the service of selecting and
organizing collections of information is more valuable than it ever was.

Like creation, curation of content is not new to digital media.
Newspapers have always filled their pages with articles acquired from
other sources, and broadcasters likewise fill out their schedules with
syndicated content. Complex business relationships have grown up around
these practices, and that’s a big part of the disruption the Internet is
causing. Digital media enables more efficient curation capabilities and
new kinds of syndication relationships. The successful digital media
business will use the Internet, software, and human ingenuity to become
the best information filter for its audience.

Compilation of Data as Content
------------------------------

Before the Internet, compilation and publication of large data sets was
the job of specialty publishers, and except for the once ubiquitous
phone book and the ever useful roadmap, such publications were expensive
and difficult to acquire. In the new digital media, compiling data sets
into content and distributing access to the data has become relatively
inexpensive. Google, Microsoft, and Yahoo now give away access to map
data and satellite imagery (and see
[OpenStreetMap](http://www.openstreetmap.org/) for a project that is making
map data truly free).

One of the goals of journalists has been not just to deliver the data,
but to help people make sense of data and statistics. New digital media
tools enable you to collect, query, and visualize data in ways that
would have been impossible, or at least prohibitively expensive, just a
few years ago. This area represents perhaps the greatest opportunity for
Internet-savvy entrepreneurs to leap-frog traditional media. Don’t know
where to start? Take a look at [Data.gov](http://data.gov/) for a huge
collection of public domain data waiting to be sifted and visualized.

How Does Your Digital Media Garden Grow?
----------------------------------------

Does your digital media business focus on one of these three areas, or
dabble in all three? I would be interested to hear about (and share)
what tools you are using in each of these areas. Personally, I’m
dissatisfied with the curation tools I have tried so far, and for me
compilation of data has meant custom programming (I’m a web developer by
trade).
