---
itemtype: Item/Page/Article
guid: "urn:UUID:eb3e2a33-2993-4ad4-ab31-494817411f46"
Published: 2010-01-19
Category:
    name: Media
    label: media
Title: The Tablet Fallacy (or, Old Media is Screwed)
---

The Tablet Fallacy (or, Old Media is Screwed)
=============================================

"Help me, Obi-wan Tablet. You're my only hope!" says old media. But
these are not the droids they are looking for.

There has been so much [hand
waving](http://www.i4u.com/33130/tablets-are-vaporware-ces-2010) in the last month about
2010 being “the year of the tablet”, it boggles the mind. Much of the
buzz has centered around the anticipated announcement of a tablet device
by Apple, makers of the much-admired iPhone. However, media industry
wonks are all abuzz about how the [new platform will redefine
newspapers](http://gizmodo.com/5370252/apple-tablet-to-redefine-newspapers-textbooks-and-magazines),
magazines, and other print products.

At the time of this writing, the so-called iSlate is merely speculation
and rumor, with any real announcement still more than a week away. I’m
not going to waste space talking about a theoretical device. What
concerns me is the old media heralding this concept as its salvation.

For you old media geezers, here’s a hint: the problem with your business
is not the form factor.

Setting aside whether it is sensible to put so much emphasis on a
portable device that won’t fit in your pocket, especially one that is
still only a theory, riddle me this: if people won’t pay for your
content on the web, why would they pay for it on a specialty device?
(And if they *will* pay for it on the web, why would they need a
specialty device?)

I’ve been listening to lots of speculation about the revolution in
content presentation that tablet devices enable. My response is two
words: horse hockey! I have yet to hear a single thing about the slate
that does not already apply to the web. All those capabilities for rich,
interconnected content presentation? The web has had that for years, and
you have largely ignored it or [actively fought against
it](https://www.wired.com/2009/11/murdoch-could-block-google-searches-entirely/).

No, it isn’t the presentation that media companies are excited about.
It’s the idea of creating a new, closed, expensive product to replace
their flagging paper-based distribution. It will be like the old days,
they think, when people bought newspapers every day and we commanded
premium prices for display ads because we owned all the eyeballs.

Okay, one more time: the old days are over, media people. They are not
coming back. “Like a newspaper, but *digital*” is not a (viable)
product. If we wanted newspapers, we know where to get them. We’re sorry
about your gravy train going off the tracks, but it is time for you to
recognize that *you have been disintermediated*.

It is time to start thinking about new ways to serve your community, and
new business models to go with them. There are plenty of real needs in
the marketplace that could be filled by a savvy media company, one
willing and able to [truly
innovate](https://stevebuttry.wordpress.com/2009/04/27/a-blueprint-for-the-complete-community-connection/)
rather than just repainting a burning barn.

All this talk about tablets just underscores the fact that the media
industry, and especially the newspaper industry, is stuck in twentieth
century thinking (and as a result is stuck with their twentieth century
business model). Tablets devices may or may not succeed as a form
factor, but media businesses definitely will not succeed without some
fresh thinking about what their customers need and how to provide it.
