---
guid: "urn:UUID:37ce972c-a90e-4ec4-b66b-60a749dd6e37"
itemtype: Item/Page/Article
Published: 2010-01-12
Category: Media
Title: The Real Value of Social Media is its Weakness
---

# The Real Value of Social Media is its Weakness

Many still doubt the utility of social media. I myself was among the
doubters until I was forced onto Twitter and Facebook to test the social
media integration for a web site I was developing. That’s when I
discovered that, although [Sturgeon’s
Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sturgeon%27s_Law) applies to social
media as much as anything else, the small percentage of “good stuff” is
exceedingly valuable.

Case in point is this article: [In a pinch, Twitter found a long shot
source | By Daniel
Victor](http://bydanielvictor.com/2010/01/11/in-a-pinch-twitter-found-a-longshot-source/).
Stuck playing catch up on a story on a Sunday evening, with deadline
looming, journalist Daniel Victor turned to Twitter in a last ditch
search for sources. Long story short, Twitter came through for him.

The value of social networking tools like Twitter and Facebook is not
immediately obvious to some (it wasn’t to me), and may even be counter
intuitive. I’ve heard complaints that it’s difficult or impossible to
form deep relationships through digital media, and
[Luddite](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luddite) sentiment that we should
turn back to “face time” in our relationships. I disagree with the idea
that deep relationships cannot be formed online, but the real value of
social media is not in the deep relationships. It’s in the [weak
ties](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weak_ties).

According to network theory, it’s the weak ties in a social network that
transfer the most value (by social network here we are not talking about
the online space, but connections between people however they are formed
and maintained). Those to whom we are closely connected obviously are
valuable to us for personal reasons, but when it comes to economic
value, it’s the casual acquaintances who add the most value.

When you are looking for a job, a client, a customer, it is the people
in the periphery of your network who can connect you to valuable
resources you would not otherwise have found. A former co-worker has a
cousin who is looking for someone with just your skills, that sort of
thing. [Malcolm
Gladwell](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0316346624?tag=webquills-20)
called these people _connectors_, because they move in and out of many
circles, cross-pollinating them like a (forgive the phrase) social
butterfly.

The power of social media technologies is that they grease the
proverbial skids. Using these new tools, we can all become connectors.
The technology enables us to manage a larger number of weak ties than
[Dunbar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunbar%27s_number) would
otherwise permit, thereby increasing the size and theoretical value of
our personal network. You might only “know” a hundred people in “real
life”, but your network on Twitter and LinkedIn might contain 500 links
or more. And while all those folks won’t come to your sister’s wedding,
at least a few would be happy to connect you to a local political
operator to help you with a story for your paper, as Daniel Victor
discovered.

The true value of social media is not the strong connections it enables,
but the weak ones.
