---
itemtype: Item/Page/Article
guid: "urn:UUID:250d14d9-bea8-4bca-b148-024a10376644"
Date: 2013-01-22 16:08
Author: Vince Veselosky
Slug: take-heed-managers-your-best-practices
Category:
    name: Business
    label: business
Title: "Take heed, managers: your 'best practices' are killing your company"
---

# Take heed, managers: your "best practices" are killing your company

If you are a manager, you *need* to understand the ideas of [W. Edwards
Deming][]. Deming wrote several books about management, in which he
chastised American business schools and American corporate management
for perpetuating a failed philosophy and failed management techniques.

Deming proposed a new philosophy of management motivated by quality and
grounded in systems theory. The Deming philosophy is too deep, too
broad, and too rich to be explained in a mere blog post. Volumes have
been written about it, and as I read those volumes I am sharing my
thoughts through this venue (with apologies to Mr. Deming if I
misrepresent anything, I am still learning.)

Probably the best introduction to Deming and his theories is his Red
Bead Experiment. The experiment is detailed in Chapter 7 of his book,
[The New Economics for Industry, Government, Education][]. The
experiment is extremely educational, and I highly recommend you watch it
play out in the video below (you’ll need about an hour).

[!embed](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HBW1_GhRKTA&list=PLqhO2GMDXDYPuCQh-OsPNV9EBimhPBMAZ)

[Deming's Red Bead Experiment](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HBW1_GhRKTA&list=PLqhO2GMDXDYPuCQh-OsPNV9EBimhPBMAZ)

In case you haven’t the time to watch the video version, here is the one
paragraph summary of the Red Bead Experiment.

The experiment simulates a company, the White Bead Corporation, whose
job is to ship white beads to its customers. Several employees are
recruited from the audience, including line workers and quality control
workers. Workers are presented with a box containing 3,200 small white
beads, and 800 red beads of the same size. They are given a tool to
extract beads from the box 50 at a time, and strict instructions on how
to carry out their task of “making” white beads. They use the tool as
instructed, then report each batch to quality control for inspection,
where the number of defects (red beads) is recorded. The foreman (the
instructor) tries several management techniques to improve the
performance of his workers: he puts up motivational posters, sets
numerical goals, introduces pay incentives, conducts individual
performance reviews, and finally lays off the poorest performers. In the
end, the company goes out of business because it cannot meet customer
demand for defect-free white beads.

Now, observers of this experiment can see that the game is rigged. The
workers are destined to fail, and that is precisely the point that
Deming is trying to make to the managers.

“Apparent performance is actually attributable mostly to the system that
the individual works in, not to the individual himself,” Deming wrote.
Despite the fact that there were observable differences between the
output of individual workers, those differences were entirely the result
of *common cause*, that is, the variation is inherent to the system
itself. All the efforts spent trying to improve the individual
performance of the workers is wasted, because the flaw is not in their
performance, but in the system under which they work.

Deming warns, “Instead of setting numerical quotas, management should
work on improvement of the process.” As a manager, it is your job to
understand the difference between *special causes* that should be
remedied individually, and *common causes* that can only be eliminated
with a change to the system itself. And as a manager, the system is
*your* responsibility, not to be delegated.

Deming describes how numerical quotas and incentive are not only
useless, but actually counter-productive. He gives several examples
where workers may report misleading figures, or make poor business
decisions that game the system so that the numbers work out. A grocery
manager accountable for inventory pulls cashiers to audit a delivery
while paying customers wait in line. He stops stocking certain items
that move slowly and might spoil on the shelf, forcing customers to shop
elsewhere for those items. “He knows 55 other ways to help to meet his
allowance of 1 percent shrinkage, all of which hurt the business. Can
anybody blame him for living within his allowance?”

Listening to Deming, you have to conclude that those annual performance
reviews you conduct as a manager are aimed in the wrong direction.
Performance of your employees is not a result of the employee’s
competence, but of the manager’s competence to build a system in which
they can be productive. If your employees are not performing up to
standards, you as a manager need to ask yourself what *you* are doing
wrong. What changes must be made to the *process* of your business to
make these employees productive? Ask them, they can probably tell you
several, because they actually want to achieve, and they can see what
parts of the system are holding them back.

Incentive programs and performance reviews are considered management
“best practices” and this is why Deming chastised American managers.
These practices simply don’t produce the results managers are looking
for. Have you ever had a performance review or bonus program result in
an order of magnitude increase in productivity? Never. At best, you’ll
squeeze out a few percentage points. At worst, you make your employees
feel micro-managed and powerless, removing all desire they may have to
improve.

To move the needle on organizational productivity, you need to focus on
the *process* by which your company produces value, and constantly
improve that process.

  [W. Edwards Deming]: http://www.amazon.com/W.-Edwards-Deming/e/B000APR1PW/?_encoding=UTF8&tag=controlescape-20&linkCode=ur2&camp=1789&creative=390957
  [The New Economics for Industry, Government, Education]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B004ZK8RTM/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=controlescape-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B004ZK8RTM
