Title: How Newspapers Lost the Classifieds Business (and how to get it back)
Date: 2010-01-08
Category: Media

How Newspapers Lost the Classifieds Business (and how to get it back)
=====================================================================

Time was, [newspapers owned the local classified ads
business](http://www.pbs.org/idealab/2009/08/future-of-local-news-about-more-than-paid-content225.html),
and it was their cash cow. Many people bought the paper just for the
classifieds, and it was by far the most valuable real estate of the
paper. In recent years, free Internet- based alternatives like Craig’s
List decimated their business and contributed greatly to the decline of
newspapers.

In this November 2009 interview, [Craig
Donato](http://twitter.com/craigoodle), CEO of
[Oodle](http://www.oodle.com/), an online classifieds startup, explains
that [“If You’re The Challenger, You Have To Play A Different
Game”](http://mixergy.com/oodle-craig-donato/). He tells [Andrew
Warner](http://www.linkedin.com/in/andrewwarner) how he was able to
build a successful online classifieds business despite free competition,
and become the classifieds provider for many local newspapers.

Donato shows that his company achieved success through innovation based
on customer needs, whereas newspapers remained complacent and failed to
compete. Clearly, there is room for both free and paid providers in this
industry, but the key is innovation in providing customer value.
Newspapers, so long enjoying monopoly privileges in their markets,
didn’t have the innovation experience they needed to compete in the
newly opened market.

[Watch Mixergy’s interview with Craig
Donato](http://mixergy.com/oodle-craig-donato/)
