Date: 2010-01-25
Title: NYT’s Freemium Paywall Plan is (maybe) Good Business
Category: Media

NYT’s Freemium Paywall Plan is (maybe) Good Business
====================================================

Last week, the New York Times announced [plans to start
charging](http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/21/business/media/21times.html?hp&emc=na)
certain readers for access to their web site (see the [official press
release](http://phx.corporate-ir.net/phoenix.zhtml?c=105317&p=irol-pressArticle&ID=1377114&highlight)).
Reaction was predictable: [Jeff Jarvis
complained](http://www.buzzmachine.com/2010/01/17/the-cockeyed-economics-of-metering-reading/),
[TechCrunch ran some
numbers](http://www.techcrunch.com/2010/01/20/new-york-times-meter-needle/),
and
[Mashable](http://mashable.com/2010/01/20/new-york-times-to-start-charging/)
used it as an excuse to talk about a rumored but still unannounced Apple
product (seriously Mashable? come on).

![The proposed "pay wall" is actually one of the six kinds of Free! You
only pay if you really value the
content.](https://fbexternal-a.akamaihd.net/safe_image.php?d=AQDDMZckqydzSwpC&url=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.flickr.com%2F3221%2F2759517762_38be64311d.jpg)

The first thing to understand about the announced pay model is that it
is misnamed. The NYT press release refers to it as a “metered model” and
most reporters are using that language. However, this phrase gives
entirely the wrong impression. Most people think of “metered” as the
power utility model: you pay for it all, and the more you use, the more
you pay.

What the Times is actually proposing is a
[Freemium](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freemium) model: you get limited
access for free, or you pay a fixed fee for unlimited access. The only
thing they are “metering” (actually *measuring*) is how many free page
views you have used. When you hit a certain number, they ask you to
subscribe. (And if you already subscribe to the Times, even just the
Sunday edition, you’re covered.)

The Times people have put some good thinking into this, and for once the
business model does make some sense, despite what [Jeff Jarvis
says](http://www.buzzmachine.com/2010/01/17/the-cockeyed-economics-of-metering-reading/).
The logic goes like this. People who use our product frequently are
likely to think it is valuable, and are therefore *more* likely to be
willing to pay for that value. Infrequent visitors, who value our
product less, can be monetized with lower value ad impressions, but we
don’t want to spend too much supplying these freeloaders, so we’ll cut
them off at some point.

[PaidContent said it
best](http://paidcontent.org/article/419-nine-questions-new-york-times-goes-metered/):

> It’s about tweaking the dials, up and down, to capture the payments of
> truly loyal readers who find continuing value in the brand, while not
> losing a critical number of occasional visitors.

As [TechCrunch pointed
out](http://www.techcrunch.com/2010/01/20/new-york-times-meter-needle/),
the key to making the model work is to have excellent audience
analytics. The Times will have to find the sweet spot in both number of
free views and cost of subscription to maximize subscription revenue
without sacrificing display ad rates.

But more than that, the company needs to use the subscription as just
one of many touch points to build a stronger relationship with loyal
readers. It’s that relationship from which the real value of the
business is derived.
