---
itemtype: Item/Page/Article
guid: "urn:UUID:0a5f96c9-8343-40c2-a0ad-82716db78798"
Date: 2015-04-15
Category:
    name: Media
    label: media
Title: A New Mission for Media
...

A New Mission for Media
=======================

> Facilitate the flow of information to the point of its highest value.

The media industry at large has lost its path. Most media companies are
heavily tilted toward media as entertainment, rather than media as
information. As a result, they are engaged in a digital race to the
bottom, where falling ad CPM drives them to seek higher page view
numbers on thinner margins, focusing on quantity rather than quality, on
usage rather than utility. This has left a huge, [blue
ocean](http://www.blueoceanstrategy.com/) of market opportunities in
focused information services open to software and technology companies,
who are growing at exponential rates while traditional media companies
struggle to slow the rate at which their business is shrinking. Media
businesses can stop drowning and start growing again if they recognize
and adopt the mission statement above, the mission that media
organizations have always had.

As a media organization, your mission is to facilitate the flow of
information to the point of its highest value.

That doesn’t just mean its highest value to you, the business, but the
highest value over all to the community you serve.
[Journalism can be seen as a
 fulfillment of this
 mission](../2010/journalism-too-important-to-be-locked-up.html),
because information about corporate malfeasance or government activity
has more value to society when it is in the hands of consumers or
voters. But media organizations, and especially newspaper organizations,
need to embrace the idea that news is more than just journalism, and
media is more than just news.

A perfect example of an information service that should have been, but
was not, created by a media company, is [Waze](https://www.waze.com/).
Waze is a mobile application that feeds its users real-time traffic
information and turn-by-turn directions. Now, media companies have been
providing their users with traffic information for decades, even going
to the expense of paying for aerial observation helicopters to monitor
traffic conditions. They knew there was a market need there. They
thought they were filling it. Then Waze came along and stole their
thunder, because Waze gives users *exactly* the information they need,
at the *exact* time that they need it, and that makes the information
much more valuable to the consumer. The fact that you publish the same
information on your web site or broadcast it over the radio is
irrelevant. Waze provides that information at the point of its highest
value. Waze is doing the job of a media company.

Why didn’t a media company invent Waze? In fact, why didn’t *every*
local media company across America re-invent it? It’s certainly not
because they didn’t know about the market need. I think it’s because
they lost sight of their mission. They were thinking about attracting
audiences to their products, when they should have been thinking about
how to serve their audiences better. Had they been focused on
facilitating the flow of information (rather than merely the flow of
advertising dollars), they might have recognized the opportunity.

The proliferation of personal, always-present, always-connected,
location-aware mobile devices presents a *huge* growth opportunity for
media businesses. More than ever before, it is now possible to deliver
information to your audience at the exact time and place that it will
have the most value.

You, as a media business, should be brainstorming every day to find new
situations where a specific person needs some specific information at
some specific time, and crafting new products for those situations. Some
of these products will be so valuable that your audience will pay for
them. Some will be better suited to an ad-supported model. Still others
may be sponsored by a single business or organization. Some may lend
themselves to in-app purchase opportunities. By addressing the timely
information needs of your audience, you open the possibility of multiple
revenue streams. If you perform this brainstorming exercise, you will
come up with many, possibly hundreds of ideas.

It is your responsibility, media executives, to structure your business
as a pipeline for testing and scaling these ideas. Train your audience
development team in the latest (fastest and cheapest) [user research
methods](http://www.usability.gov/what-and-why/user-research.html).
Train your product development team on the latest mobile and web
technologies. Leverage the on-demand compute power of the cloud to
reduce up-front capital outlays, quickly shut down experiments that
don’t pan out, and rapidly scale the ones that take off. Use application
templates to shrink your time to first prototype. All of these are ways
to reduce the cost and risk of testing new products.

Get your assembly line running and don’t let it stop. Ship a new app
every quarter, then every month, then every two weeks. If they don’t
make a splash, no worries. It’s a small investment, easy to write off.
If they do hit, scale them up and leverage the new revenue streams.

The key is to focus on the essential mission of the media, to facilitate
the flow of information to the point of its highest value, and never
stop asking how you can better serve your audience. Do this, and you
will turn your foundering media business into a rapidly growing
information services company.
