Title: A Framework for Innovation
Date: 2012-05-13 22:19
Author: Vince Veselosky
Slug: framework-for-innovation
Category: Business

How does a large company create an environment that encourages and
leverages internal innovation? Here is my checklist of prerequisites for
"enterprise" innovation:

**Great people.** You may think this goes without saying, but it cannot
be emphasized enough. You cannot hire drones who put in 8 hours for a
paycheck and then head out the door. You need passionate, creative
people, people who love their work, people who are impatient with
"getting by" and want to be the best at what they do. These are the
Innovators. Without them, innovation does not happen.

**A clear vision.** Innovation happens at the edges. It is not a
top-down directed process, it is an organic, bottom-up growth. In order
for the innovators at the edge to produce innovations that are relavent
to the business, top management must articulate and communicate a clear
vision for the direction of the company. If the innovators can see the
direction, they will innovate in that direction and get you there
faster. If not, they will innovate in random directions, and you won't
get the full benefit of innovation. A clear vision is the difference
between innovation and distraction.

**Spare capacity.** Innovation is experimentation. Innovators need time
to experiment, and they won't have that if 100% of their time is
allocated to executing your current plan. This is the hardest thing for
top managers to accept, but it is absolutely essential. You need slack
time, or there simply will not be any innovation. Allocate one slice of
your capacity for executing the plan. Reserve a second slice for
unplanned work and process improvements. Allocate a third slice
explicitly to innovation. The relative size of the slices will be
entirely dependent on your own business and your desired outcome. My
personal preference is 50/30/20.

**Freedom to make decisions.** Innovators by definition have to make
decisions, make changes, form partnerships, and allocate resources from
the pool of spare capacity. If permission is required to accomplish
these things, then innovation will be quashed before it can succeed.

***Accessible* Business Intelligence.** If you are going to give
innovators permission to make decisions, you *must* give them the
information and tools they need to fuel decision making. Innovators need
transparent access to customer data, product data, sales data, cost
data. Without it, they are shooting in the dark, and the chances of
success are low. Innovators also need easy access to tools for gathering
their own data, for evaluating experiments and measuring success vs.
failure.

**Freedom to fail.** Innovation is experimentation, and experiments, by
their nature, do not always have the expected outcome. When Innovators
exercise their power to make decisions, some of the decisions will be
wrong ones. Innovators need to feel secure that they will not be
punished for taking a chance if it doesn't work out. Remember, these
folks are corporate employees, not risk-taking entrepreneurs. They don't
stand to make millions if their innovation succeeds, so they shouldn't
have to give up their health coverage and pension if it doesn't. Make it
clear that failure is a learning opportunity, not a firing offense.

The above are a few requirements for fostering innovation in large
companies. Ultimately, innovation only happens where the culture
supports it. Managers at all levels build company culture through their
hiring and firing practices first, and management styles second. If your
managers fear the new and different, your culture will never innovate.
Ensuring the above factors at all levels of the organization should help
to unchain your hidden innovation potential.

What's missing from this list? How does your company encourage (or
discourage) innovation? Drop me a note in the comments.
