:Title: Efficiency: Enemy of Innovation?
:Date: 2012-01-19
:Author: Vince Veselosky
:Slug: efficiency-enemy-of-innovation
:Category: Business

Efficiency: Enemy of Innovation?
==================================

The science of management in the industrial age was all about
efficiency. It had to be. The whole concept of capitalism is based on
efficiency. An entrepreneur acquires capital at a cost, and that capital
must be made to produce profit at a rate higher than the cost of
capital. If you borrowed money at 10% to start your business, you had to
make it earn 11% at least. That meant controlling costs ruthlessly and
milking every bit of productivity from every penny's worth of capital.

But talk to a systems administrator about efficiency. She'll tell you
that, in terms of percentage of server utilization, there are two
numbers you never want to approach, numbers that will cause midnight
pages and pale-faced panic. The first number, of course, is 0%.
Everything is down! The second, more surprising but equally frightening
number is: 100%! At 100% utilization, everything breaks, because you
have no more *capacity* for work.

Now a capitalist might look at a well-run data center, and his first
instinct is, "Look at all this waste! Half these servers are sitting
idle most of the day." But the clever sysadmin will tell him that spare
capacity is what keeps the data center running. If your capacity is 100
requests per second, a 101st request can bring the whole system to a
screeching halt. 100% and 0% are equally disastrous. If you want your
Internet business to operate, you *must* have spare capacity.

Now, I'm not arguing that efficiency is somehow evil. If you are in a
capital intensive business today, you still need to use that capital
efficiently. Of course the capitalist theory goes that capital + labor =
profit, but what often gets lost in the quest for efficiency is the fact
that \ *people are not labor.* That's a false assumption, and that
formula was never correct (which should not surprise anyone given `its
source <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Das_Kapital>`__). It's not labor
that turns idle capital into profit; it's *creativity* and its more
productive sister, *innovation*.

In order to innovate, in order to create, you need some very special
ingredients. First, you need *people*. Smart people, with a desire to
solve problems, the ambition to tackle big ones, and the hubris to
believe that they can do something better than everyone who has come
before them. These people then need *time* to analyze the problem and
devise or improvise solutions, and they need *resources* (read: money)
to test those solutions.

So no, efficiency is not *necessarily* the enemy of innovation. Saving
time and money on existing processes creates *spare capacity* that can
be allocated to innovation. The extra people, time, and money that are
not being used to operate the existing business, instead can be applied
to solve the next big problem and give birth to new lines of business.
But too many business leaders still see people as *labor* which, if not
making capital productive, they label as "waste". Spare capacity is
inefficiency in their eyes. They see the tools of innovation as
inefficiency, and so they attempt to eliminate it. With the result that
they eventually become irrelevant because the industry has passed them
by.

Don't fall into this trap at your company. In established processes like
manufacturing, efficiency creates value. In exploratory processes like
innovation, efficiency destroys value. Use efficiency to generate spare
capacity from your established processes. Then, use that capacity to
tackle big problems. To stay relevant and keep growing, accept that
creativity is inefficient, and pay the cost to gain the future rewards.
