Title: Systems and Mental Deficiencies
Date: 2012-04-29 19:46
Author: Vince Veselosky
Slug: systems-and-mental-deficiencies
Category: Life

# Systems and Mental Deficiencies

I was surprised when I read some of the things writer Terry Pratchett
wrote or said about developing PCA, a form of dementia. I cannot now
find the original source that I read, but there are several similar
articles. He described some symptoms of the disease slowly robbing him
of his own mind. The inability to see certain objects when they are
right in front of you. Walking into a room but having no memory of why
you went there in the first place. Difficulty comprehending written text
despite recognizing every letter and word. Difficulty recognizing
people's faces.

I was surprised when I read this, because these "symptoms" have affected
me, well, pretty much my whole life. I thought they were normal.

Since I was a child, I have had these problems. Until I have met people
many times, I may have difficulty recognizing or remembering them.
Sometimes I put something down, and then simply cannot find it again,
despite the fact that neither I nor the object have moved at all. I
stopped reading books on paper years ago because I just couldn't manage
to read one through; I would get distracted in the middle of a paragraph
and forget what I was reading. And as for walking into a room and
forgetting why you're there? Hardly a day passes without such an event
in my life. Sometimes I return to the room two or three times before I
manage to complete the task I set out to do. Sometimes I
*never* remember what I was planning to do.

Part of my obsession with systems is the result of this bizarre array of
mental quirks that I have slowly realized are not entirely "normal"
(whatever that means). Systems are a simple set of rules that I can keep
in my head. Lapses in memory become less important when the system is in
operation.

Ever lost your car keys? It's bad enough when you can't remember where
you left them. It's doubly bad when you can be staring right at them and
not *see* them. (My family calls this quirk "object-blindness" and it
drives them crazy. "Why did you put away every dish in the kitchen
*except that one*?!" I didn't see it!)

I no longer have to remember where I left my car keys; the rule says
that keys are by the door. If I forget where I left them, I can remember
the rule. If I notice them sitting somewhere else (which is rare), I
move them into compliance with the rule. When I'm about to put them
down, I remember the rule, and I put them by the door. One consistent
rule to be applied in all situations. A rule that doesn't even have to
be remembered, because it can be derived again and again. (What's the
best place to leave the keys? What's the first place I *could* put them
down after entering the house?)

I live my life by rules like this. I have a system for *everything* I
do. A system for packing my laptop bag to be sure I don't forget
anything. A system for loading the dishwasher. A system for making
breakfast. It sounds ridiculous, but I have rules for all these things
so that I don't have to rely on my memory to get them right.

The most important element of my life systems is an attitude I learned
only in the most recent quarter of my life, a skill Buddhists describe
as *mindfulness*. Mindfulness means being fully present, in the moment.
It releases you from remembering the past or worrying about the future
and focuses your attention on the present, the here and the now.
Mindfulness is what enables me to obey the rules *now*, as I perform the
actions which later may confound me. It is what allows me to *think*
when I put my keys down and observe the rule of where to place them.

By knowingly placing my keys by the door where they belong, I ensure
that later I can find them again. By paying attention to my actions in
the present, I ensure success in the future.





